# Day 1: The Foundation

**What is TypeScript?** TypeScript is a superset of JavaScript that adds a extra layer for static typing.

**Why Static Typing is added value?** It helps catch errors at compile time rather than runtime, making code more robust and maintainable. This is especially useful in large codebases and teams in enterprise environments.

**Key Features:**

- Static Typing
- Interfaces
- Enums
- Generics
- Access Modifiers
- Utility Types

## Code

### Setting up a TypeScript Project

**Basic Setup:**

1. Install Node.js and npm.
2. type in terminal:

   ```bash
   npm install -g typescript
   ```

   - Check TypeScript installation:

   ```bash
   tsc --version
   ```

3. Create a new project from scratch:

   3.1 move to your project folder:

   ```bash
   mkdir my-ts-project
   cd my-ts-project
   ```

   3.2 Initialize a new project:

   - with npm:
     > This creates a `package.json`, `package-lock.json` files and `node_modules` folder.

   ```bash
   npm init -y
   npm install typescript --save-dev
   npx tsc --init
   ```

   - with TypeScript:
     > This creates a `tsconfig.json` file.

   ```bash
   npm init -y
   tsc --init
   ```

   > **Note:** the difference between `tsconfig.json` and `package.json` is that the first one is for TypeScript compiler options, while the second one is for managing project dependencies and scripts.
   > **tsc --init vs npx tsc --init:** The first command initializes TypeScript globally, while the second one uses the local version installed in your project.

4. Create a `src` folder and add a `index.ts` file inside it.

   ```bash
   mkdir src
   echo "// Your TypeScript code goes here" > src/index.ts
   ```

5. Compile TypeScript to JavaScript:

   ```bash
   npx tsc
   ```

   > **Bonus:**
   >
   > - if you want to split the compiled files into a separate folder, you can modify the `tsconfig.json` file and uncomment the following lines:
   >
   > ```json
   >     "rootDir": "./src",
   >     "outDir": "./dist",
   > ```
   >
   > - Then run `npx tsc` again, and the compiled JavaScript files will be in the `dist` folder.
   > - modify the file `package.json` to add a script for building the project:
   >
   > ```json
   >     "scripts": {
   >         // delete the existing "test" script
   >         // "nameOfYourScript": "Command to run"
   >         "build": "tsc",
   >         "exec": "node ./dist/index.js"
   >     }
   > ```
   >
   > - Now you can build and run your project with:
   >
   > ```bash
   > npm run build
   > npm run exec
   > ```

### Setting up a TypeScript Project using templates

You can also use pre-made templates to set up a TypeScript project quickly.

1. using vite (for frontend projects):

   ```bash
   npm create vite@latest my-ts-app -- --template vanilla-ts
   cd my-ts-app
   npm install
   npm run dev
   ```

2. using express-generator (for backend projects):

   ```bash
   npx express-generator --typescript my-ts-api
   cd my-ts-api
   npm install
   npm start
   ```

3. using nestjs (for full-stack projects):

   ```bash
   npm i -g @nestjs/cli
   nest new my-nest-app
   cd my-nest-app
   npm run start
   ```
