Angular/notes/d17.md, before:

# Day 17: Angular Templates - Control Flow and Data Binding

## Data Binding

Angular provides several ways to bind data between components and templates.

### 1. Interpolation: {{ }}

Display component properties in the template:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <h1>Welcome, {{ username }}!</h1>
    <p>You have {{ taskCount }} tasks</p>
    <p>Current time: {{ currentTime }}</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  username = "John";
  taskCount = 5;
  currentTime = new Date();
}
```

### 2. Property Binding: [property]

Bind component properties to DOM element properties:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Binding to element properties -->
    <img [src]="imageUrl" />
    <button [disabled]="isDisabled">Click me</button>
    <div [title]="tooltipText">Hover me</div>

    <!-- Binding to component properties -->
    <app-task [task]="currentTask"></app-task>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  imageUrl = "https://example.com/image.png";
  isDisabled = false;
  tooltipText = "This is a tooltip";
  currentTask = { id: 1, title: "Learn Angular" };
}
```

### 3. Event Binding: (event)

Handle DOM events:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <button (click)="onButtonClick()">Click me</button>
    <input (keyup)="onKeyUp($event)" />
    <form (submit)="onSubmit()">
      <input type="submit" value="Submit" />
    </form>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  onButtonClick(): void {
    console.log("Button clicked");
  }

  onKeyUp(event: any): void {
    const value = event.target.value;
    console.log("Input value:", value);
  }

  onSubmit(): void {
    console.log("Form submitted");
  }
}
```

### 4. Two-Way Binding: [(ngModel)]

Bind to form input values:

```typescript
import { CommonModule } from "@angular/common";
import { FormsModule } from "@angular/forms";

@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule, FormsModule],
  template: `
    <input [(ngModel)]="name" />
    <p>Hello, {{ name }}!</p>

    <input type="checkbox" [(ngModel)]="isSubscribed" />
    <p>Subscribed: {{ isSubscribed }}</p>

    <select [(ngModel)]="selectedOption">
      <option value="option1">Option 1</option>
      <option value="option2">Option 2</option>
    </select>
    <p>Selected: {{ selectedOption }}</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  name = "";
  isSubscribed = false;
  selectedOption = "option1";
}
```

### 5. Class Binding: [class]

Dynamically add/remove CSS classes:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Single class -->
    <div [class.active]="isActive">Active?</div>

    <!-- Multiple classes -->
    <div [class]="'button btn-primary'">Button</div>

    <!-- Object syntax (recommended) -->
    <div [ngClass]="{ active: isActive, disabled: isDisabled }">
      Dynamic Classes
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [
    `
      .active {
        color: green;
      }
      .disabled {
        opacity: 0.5;
      }
    `,
  ],
})
export class MyComponent {
  isActive = true;
  isDisabled = false;
}
```

### 6. Style Binding: [style]

Dynamically set inline styles:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Single style -->
    <div [style.color]="textColor">Colored text</div>

    <!-- Multiple styles -->
    <div [ngStyle]="{ color: textColor, 'font-size': fontSize }">
      Styled text
    </div>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  textColor = "red";
  fontSize = "20px";
}
```

---

## Control Flow Directives

Angular 17+ introduces new control flow syntax (replacing \*ngIf, \*ngFor, etc.):

### 1. @if Block

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- New syntax (Angular 17+) -->
    @if (isLoggedIn) {
    <p>Welcome, {{ username }}!</p>
    } @else if (isPending) {
    <p>Loading...</p>
    } @else {
    <a href="/login">Please log in</a>
    }
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  isLoggedIn = true;
  isPending = false;
  username = "John";
}
```

### 2. @for Loop

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- New syntax (Angular 17+) -->
    <ul>
      @for (task of tasks; track task.id) {
      <li>
        {{ task.title }}
        <button (click)="deleteTask(task.id)">Delete</button>
      </li>
      } @empty {
      <li>No tasks found</li>
      }
    </ul>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  tasks = [
    { id: 1, title: "Learn Angular" },
    { id: 2, title: "Build app" },
  ];

  deleteTask(id: number): void {
    this.tasks = this.tasks.filter((t) => t.id !== id);
  }
}
```

### 3. @switch Statement

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- New syntax (Angular 17+) -->
    @switch (userRole) { @case ('admin') {
    <p>Welcome, admin!</p>
    } @case ('user') {
    <p>Welcome, user!</p>
    } @default {
    <p>Unknown role</p>
    } }
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  userRole = "admin";
}
```

---

## Legacy Control Flow (Angular 16 and earlier)

### \*ngIf Directive

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule],
  template: `
    <div *ngIf="isLoggedIn; else notLoggedIn">
      <p>Welcome, {{ username }}!</p>
    </div>

    <ng-template #notLoggedIn>
      <p>Please log in</p>
    </ng-template>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  isLoggedIn = true;
  username = "John";
}
```

### \*ngFor Directive

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule],
  template: `
    <ul>
      <li *ngFor="let task of tasks; let i = index">
        {{ i + 1 }}. {{ task.title }}
      </li>
    </ul>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  tasks = [
    { id: 1, title: "Learn Angular" },
    { id: 2, title: "Build app" },
  ];
}
```

### \*ngSwitch Directive

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule],
  template: `
    <div [ngSwitch]="userRole">
      <p *ngSwitchCase="'admin'">You are an admin</p>
      <p *ngSwitchCase="'user'">You are a user</p>
      <p *ngSwitchDefault>Unknown role</p>
    </div>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  userRole = "user";
}
```

---

## Attribute Binding

Bind to HTML attributes (not DOM properties):

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Property binding (recommended for most cases) -->
    <img [src]="imageUrl" />

    <!-- Attribute binding (for attributes without DOM properties) -->
    <button [attr.aria-label]="buttonLabel">Button</button>

    <!-- Also good for non-standard attributes -->
    <div [attr.data-id]="userId">Content</div>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  imageUrl = "image.png";
  buttonLabel = "Click me";
  userId = 123;
}
```

---

## Pipes: Transform Data in Templates

Pipes format data for display:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Built-in pipes -->
    <p>{{ price | currency }}</p>
    <p>{{ birthDate | date : "short" }}</p>
    <p>{{ name | uppercase }}</p>
    <p>{{ items | slice : 0 : 3 }}</p>

    <!-- Chaining pipes -->
    <p>{{ price | currency | uppercase }}</p>

    <!-- Pipe with arguments -->
    <p>{{ message | slice : 0 : 5 }}</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  price = 100;
  birthDate = new Date("1990-01-01");
  name = "john";
  items = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
  message = "Hello World";
}
```

### Common Built-in Pipes

```plain
AsyncPipe        | await {{ asyncValue | async }}
CurrencyPipe     | {{ price | currency }}
DatePipe         | {{ date | date: 'short' }}
DecimalPipe      | {{ number | number: '1.2-2' }}
JsonPipe         | {{ object | json }}
KeyValuePipe     | *ngFor="let item of object | keyvalue"
LowercasePipe    | {{ text | lowercase }}
UppercasePipe    | {{ text | uppercase }}
PercentPipe      | {{ 0.25 | percent }}
SlicePipe        | {{ array | slice: 0:3 }}
TitlecasePipe    | {{ 'hello world' | titlecase }}
```

---

## Safe Navigation Operator: ?

Prevents errors when accessing properties on undefined objects:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Without safe navigation (can error) -->
    <p>{{ user.profile.avatar }}</p>

    <!-- With safe navigation (safe) -->
    <p>{{ user?.profile?.avatar }}</p>

    <!-- In ngIf -->
    <p *ngIf="user?.profile">Profile exists</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  user: any = null; // Could be null
}
```

---

## Template Reference Variables

Reference DOM elements or components:

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [FormsModule],
  template: `
    <input #nameInput type="text" />
    <button (click)="displayValue(nameInput)">Show Value</button>

    <app-child #childComponent></app-child>
    <button (click)="callChildMethod(childComponent)">Call Child</button>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  displayValue(input: any): void {
    console.log(input.value);
  }

  callChildMethod(child: any): void {
    child.someMethod();
  }
}
```

---

## Event Object: $event

Access event details:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Native DOM event -->
    <input (keyup)="onKeyUp($event)" />

    <!-- Component output event -->
    <app-child (itemSelected)="onItemSelected($event)"></app-child>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  onKeyUp(event: KeyboardEvent): void {
    const value = (event.target as HTMLInputElement).value;
    console.log(value);
  }

  onItemSelected(item: any): void {
    console.log("Selected:", item);
  }
}
```

---

## Summary

- **Data Binding:** Connects component properties to templates
- **Interpolation:** Display values with {{ }}
- **Property Binding:** Bind to element properties with [ ]
- **Event Binding:** Handle events with ( )
- **Two-Way Binding:** Synchronize data with [(ngModel)]
- **Class/Style Binding:** Dynamically add classes and styles
- **Control Flow:** Use @if, @for, @switch for conditional rendering (Angular 17+)
- **Pipes:** Transform data for display
- **Safe Navigation:** Use ? to prevent null reference errors
- **Template Variables:** Reference elements with #variable

Commit message:

feat: initialize Angular application structure with routing, components, and testing setup
- Added app routing configuration in app.routes.ts
- Created app component with basic template and title binding in app.ts
- Implemented unit tests for app component in app.spec.ts
- Set up main entry point in main.ts
- Created index.html for application structure
- Added global styles in styles.css
- Configured TypeScript settings in tsconfig.json and related files
- Updated documentation in d17.md for two-way binding and pipes

Angular/notes/d17.md, after:

# Day 17: Angular Templates - Control Flow and Data Binding

## Data Binding

Angular provides several ways to bind data between components and templates.

### 1. Interpolation: {{ }}

Display component properties in the template:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <h1>Welcome, {{ username }}!</h1>
    <p>You have {{ taskCount }} tasks</p>
    <p>Current time: {{ currentTime }}</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  username = "John";
  taskCount = 5;
  currentTime = new Date();
}
```

### 2. Property Binding: [property]

Bind component properties to DOM element properties:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Binding to element properties -->
    <img [src]="imageUrl" />
    <button [disabled]="isDisabled">Click me</button>
    <div [title]="tooltipText">Hover me</div>

    <!-- Binding to component properties -->
    <app-task [task]="currentTask"></app-task>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  imageUrl = "https://example.com/image.png";
  isDisabled = false;
  tooltipText = "This is a tooltip";
  currentTask = { id: 1, title: "Learn Angular" };
}
```

### 3. Event Binding: (event)

Handle DOM events:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <button (click)="onButtonClick()">Click me</button>
    <input (keyup)="onKeyUp($event)" />
    <form (submit)="onSubmit()">
      <input type="submit" value="Submit" />
    </form>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  onButtonClick(): void {
    console.log("Button clicked");
  }

  onKeyUp(event: any): void {
    const value = event.target.value;
    console.log("Input value:", value);
  }

  onSubmit(): void {
    console.log("Form submitted");
  }
}
```

### 4. Two-Way Binding: [(ngModel)]

Two-way data binding between is a way to bind data between the component and the template, allowing for automatic synchronization of state in both directions. e.g., when a user types into an input field, the corresponding component property is updated, and if the component property changes programmatically, the input field reflects that change as well.

By the use of the `[(ngModel)]` syntax, Angular developers can achieve two-way data binding, which means that any changes made to the input field will automatically update the corresponding property in the component class, and vice versa. This is directive tells Angular to bind the value of the input field to the `name` property in the component class, and also to update the `name` property whenever the user types into the input field.

```typescript
import { CommonModule } from "@angular/common";
import { FormsModule } from "@angular/forms";

@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule, FormsModule],
  template: `
    <input [(ngModel)]="name" />
    <p>Hello, {{ name }}!</p>

    <input type="checkbox" [(ngModel)]="isSubscribed" />
    <p>Subscribed: {{ isSubscribed }}</p>

    <select [(ngModel)]="selectedOption">
      <option value="option1">Option 1</option>
      <option value="option2">Option 2</option>
    </select>
    <p>Selected: {{ selectedOption }}</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  name = "";
  isSubscribed = false;
  selectedOption = "option1";
}
```

### 5. Class Binding: [class]

Class binding is used to dynamically add or remove CSS classes from HTML elements based on data in your component. This allows you to conditionally apply styles, creating dynamic and responsive user interfaces.

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Single class -->
    <div [class.active]="isActive">Active?</div>

    <!-- Multiple classes -->
    <div [class]="'button btn-primary'">Button</div>

    <!-- Object syntax (recommended) -->
    <div [ngClass]="{ active: isActive, disabled: isDisabled }">
      Dynamic Classes
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [
    `
      .active {
        color: green;
      }
      .disabled {
        opacity: 0.5;
      }
    `,
  ],
})
export class MyComponent {
  isActive = true;
  isDisabled = false;
}
```

### 6. Style Binding: [style]

Dynamically set inline styles:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Single style -->
    <div [style.color]="textColor">Colored text</div>

    <!-- Multiple styles -->
    <div [ngStyle]="{ color: textColor, 'font-size': fontSize }">
      Styled text
    </div>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  textColor = "red";
  fontSize = "20px";
}
```

---

## Control Flow Directives

Angular 17+ introduces new control flow syntax (replacing \*ngIf, \*ngFor, etc.):

### 1. @if Block

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- New syntax (Angular 17+) -->
    @if (isLoggedIn) {
    <p>Welcome, {{ username }}!</p>
    } @else if (isPending) {
    <p>Loading...</p>
    } @else {
    <a href="/login">Please log in</a>
    }
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  isLoggedIn = true;
  isPending = false;
  username = "John";
}
```

### 2. @for Loop

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- New syntax (Angular 17+) -->
    <ul>
      @for (task of tasks; track task.id) {
      <li>
        {{ task.title }}
        <button (click)="deleteTask(task.id)">Delete</button>
      </li>
      } @empty {
      <li>No tasks found</li>
      }
    </ul>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  tasks = [
    { id: 1, title: "Learn Angular" },
    { id: 2, title: "Build app" },
  ];

  deleteTask(id: number): void {
    this.tasks = this.tasks.filter((t) => t.id !== id);
  }
}
```

### 3. @switch Statement

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- New syntax (Angular 17+) -->
    @switch (userRole) { @case ('admin') {
    <p>Welcome, admin!</p>
    } @case ('user') {
    <p>Welcome, user!</p>
    } @default {
    <p>Unknown role</p>
    } }
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  userRole = "admin";
}
```

---

## Legacy Control Flow (Angular 16 and earlier)

### \*ngIf Directive

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule],
  template: `
    <div *ngIf="isLoggedIn; else notLoggedIn">
      <p>Welcome, {{ username }}!</p>
    </div>

    <ng-template #notLoggedIn>
      <p>Please log in</p>
    </ng-template>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  isLoggedIn = true;
  username = "John";
}
```

### \*ngFor Directive

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule],
  template: `
    <ul>
      <li *ngFor="let task of tasks; let i = index">
        {{ i + 1 }}. {{ task.title }}
      </li>
    </ul>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  tasks = [
    { id: 1, title: "Learn Angular" },
    { id: 2, title: "Build app" },
  ];
}
```

### \*ngSwitch Directive

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [CommonModule],
  template: `
    <div [ngSwitch]="userRole">
      <p *ngSwitchCase="'admin'">You are an admin</p>
      <p *ngSwitchCase="'user'">You are a user</p>
      <p *ngSwitchDefault>Unknown role</p>
    </div>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  userRole = "user";
}
```

---

## Attribute Binding

Bind to HTML attributes (not DOM properties):

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Property binding (recommended for most cases) -->
    <img [src]="imageUrl" />

    <!-- Attribute binding (for attributes without DOM properties) -->
    <button [attr.aria-label]="buttonLabel">Button</button>

    <!-- Also good for non-standard attributes -->
    <div [attr.data-id]="userId">Content</div>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  imageUrl = "image.png";
  buttonLabel = "Click me";
  userId = 123;
}
```

---

## Pipes: Transform Data in Templates

Pipes are a special operator in Angular template expressions that allows you to transform data declaratively in your template. Pipes let you declare a transformation function once and then use that transformation across multiple templates. Angular pipes use the vertical bar character (`|`) to separate the expression from the pipe name.

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Built-in pipes -->
    <p>{{ price | currency }}</p>
    <p>{{ birthDate | date : "short" }}</p>
    <p>{{ name | uppercase }}</p>
    <p>{{ items | slice : 0 : 3 }}</p>

    <!-- Chaining pipes -->
    <p>{{ price | currency | uppercase }}</p>

    <!-- Pipe with arguments -->
    <p>{{ message | slice : 0 : 5 }}</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  price = 100;
  birthDate = new Date("1990-01-01");
  name = "john";
  items = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
  message = "Hello World";
}
```

### Common Built-in Pipes

| Pipe          | Ejemplo de uso                            |
| ------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| AsyncPipe     | `await {{ asyncValue \| async }}`         |
| CurrencyPipe  | `{{ price \| currency }}`                 |
| DatePipe      | `{{ date \| date: 'short' }}`             |
| DecimalPipe   | `{{ number \| number: '1.2-2' }}`         |
| JsonPipe      | `{{ object \| json }}`                    |
| KeyValuePipe  | `*ngFor="let item of object \| keyvalue"` |
| LowercasePipe | `{{ text \| lowercase }}`                 |
| UppercasePipe | `{{ text \| uppercase }}`                 |
| PercentPipe   | `{{ 0.25 \| percent }}`                   |
| SlicePipe     | `{{ array \| slice: 0:3 }}`               |
| TitlecasePipe | `{{ 'hello world' \| titlecase }}`        |

---

## Safe Navigation Operator: ?

Prevents errors when accessing properties on undefined objects:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Without safe navigation (can error) -->
    <p>{{ user.profile.avatar }}</p>

    <!-- With safe navigation (safe) -->
    <p>{{ user?.profile?.avatar }}</p>

    <!-- In ngIf -->
    <p *ngIf="user?.profile">Profile exists</p>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  user: any = null; // Could be null
}
```

---

## Template Reference Variables

Reference DOM elements or components

```typescript
@Component({
  standalone: true,
  imports: [FormsModule],
  template: `
    <input #nameInput type="text" />
    <button (click)="displayValue(nameInput)">Show Value</button>

    <app-child #childComponent></app-child>
    <button (click)="callChildMethod(childComponent)">Call Child</button>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  displayValue(input: any): void {
    console.log(input.value);
  }

  callChildMethod(child: any): void {
    child.someMethod();
  }
}
```

---

## Event Object: $event

Access event details:

```typescript
@Component({
  template: `
    <!-- Native DOM event -->
    <input (keyup)="onKeyUp($event)" />

    <!-- Component output event -->
    <app-child (itemSelected)="onItemSelected($event)"></app-child>
  `,
})
export class MyComponent {
  onKeyUp(event: KeyboardEvent): void {
    const value = (event.target as HTMLInputElement).value;
    console.log(value);
  }

  onItemSelected(item: any): void {
    console.log("Selected:", item);
  }
}
```

---

## Summary

- **Data Binding:** Connects component properties to templates
- **Interpolation:** Display values with {{ }}
- **Property Binding:** Bind to element properties with [ ]
- **Event Binding:** Handle events with ( )
- **Two-Way Binding:** Synchronize data with [(ngModel)]
- **Class/Style Binding:** Dynamically add classes and styles
- **Control Flow:** Use @if, @for, @switch for conditional rendering (Angular 17+)
- **Pipes:** Transform data for display
- **Safe Navigation:** Use ? to prevent null reference errors
- **Template Variables:** Reference elements with #variable
