Angular/notes/d21.md, before:

# Day 21: Routing & Navigation (SPA)

## Angular Router Basics

Routes map URL paths to components. Configure with `Routes` and provide via `provideRouter` or `RouterModule.forRoot()` in traditional modules.

```typescript
export const APP_ROUTES: Routes = [
  { path: "", redirectTo: "/home", pathMatch: "full" },
  { path: "home", component: HomeComponent },
  { path: "tasks", component: TaskListComponent },
  { path: "tasks/:id", component: TaskDetailComponent },
  { path: "**", component: NotFoundComponent },
];
```

### RouterLink and Navigation

- Template: `<a [routerLink]="['/tasks', task.id]">Open</a>`
- Programmatic: `this.router.navigate(['/tasks', id], { queryParams: { ref: 'email' } });`

---

## Route Parameters and Query Params

- `ActivatedRoute` provides `paramMap` and `queryParamMap`.
- Use `snapshot` for one-time read, observables for changes.

```typescript
this.route.paramMap.subscribe((params) => {
  const id = params.get("id");
});
```

---

## Child Routes & Layouts

Nested routes allow layouts with outlets:

```typescript
{ path: 'admin', component: AdminShell, children: [ { path: 'users', component: AdminUsers } ] }
```

---

## Lazy Loading

Split large apps into lazy-loaded modules for performance.

```typescript
{ path: 'shop', loadChildren: () => import('./shop/shop.routes').then(m => m.SHOP_ROUTES) }
```

Preloading strategies (PreloadAllModules) improve UX after initial load.

---

## Guards

- `CanActivate` — block navigation.
- `CanActivateChild` — guard child routes.
- `CanDeactivate` — prevent leaving a route.
- `Resolve` — fetch data before activating a route.

```typescript
@Injectable({ providedIn: "root" })
export class AuthGuard implements CanActivate {
  constructor(private auth: AuthService, private router: Router) {}
  canActivate(): boolean | UrlTree {
    if (this.auth.isLoggedIn()) return true;
    return this.router.parseUrl("/login");
  }
}
```

---

## Navigation Extras

- `replaceUrl`, `skipLocationChange`, `state` are available for advanced scenarios.
- Use `router.getCurrentNavigation()?.extras.state` to read passed state.

---

## Resolvers

Resolvers let you load required data before the component is created to avoid loading states inside the component.

---

## Best Practices

- Keep routes declarative and small.
- Use lazy loading for feature areas.
- Use guards and resolvers to secure and prepare routes.
- Use route data (`data: { title: 'Tasks' }`) for meta info.

Commit message:

feat: add home component with features and navigation
- Created home component with a welcoming message and feature list.
- Implemented routing to product catalog.
- Added unit tests for home component.

style: enhance navbar styles and functionality

- Updated navbar styles for better responsiveness and aesthetics.
- Replaced links with buttons for navigation.
- Added click handlers for navigation.

feat: introduce product list component

- Created product list component to display products dynamically.
- Integrated cart total display.
- Added unit tests for product list component.

style: improve product card design

- Enhanced product card styles for better visual appeal.
- Added hover effects and responsive design adjustments.

feat: implement sidebar component with toggle functionality

- Created sidebar component with toggle button for mobile view.
- Added close functionality for sidebar.
- Improved sidebar styles for better usability.

style: define global CSS variables for consistent theming

- Established a set of global CSS variables for colors, spacing, and typography.
- Updated existing styles to utilize these variables for consistency.

docs: update routing and navigation notes

- Added detailed explanations of Angular routing, outlets, and navigation.

Angular/notes/d21.md, after:

# Day 21: Routing & Navigation (SPA)

Angular Router (`@angular/router`) is the official library for managing navigation in Angular applications and a core part of the framework.

**How Angular manages routing?**

Routing in Angular is comprised of three primary parts:

- `Routes` define which component displays when a user visits a specific URL.
- `Outlets` are placeholders in your templates that dynamically load and render components based on the active route.
- `Links` provide a way for users to navigate between different routes in your application without triggering a full page reload.

## Angular Router Basics

Routes map URL paths to components. Configure with `Routes` and provide via `provideRouter` or `RouterModule.forRoot()` in traditional modules.

```typescript
// app.routes.ts
import { Routes } from "@angular/router";
export const APP_ROUTES: Routes = [
  { path: "", redirectTo: "/home", pathMatch: "full" },
  { path: "home", component: HomeComponent },
  { path: "tasks", component: TaskListComponent },
  { path: "tasks/:id", component: TaskDetailComponent },
  { path: "**", component: NotFoundComponent },
];
```

### Outlets

Use `<router-outlet></router-outlet>` in templates to render matched components.

```html
<router-outlet></router-outlet>
```

> Multiple outlets can be defined with names for complex layouts. The main goal of an outlet is to serve as a placeholder where the router can dynamically load and display components based on the current route. like so:

```html
<router-outlet name="sidebar"></router-outlet> <router-outlet></router-outlet>
```

### RouterLink and Navigation

- Template: `<a [routerLink]="['/tasks', task.id]">Open</a>`
- Programmatic: `this.router.navigate(['/tasks', id], { queryParams: { ref: 'email' } });`

---

## Route Parameters and Query Params

- `ActivatedRoute` provides `paramMap` and `queryParamMap`.
- Use `snapshot` for one-time read, observables for changes.

```typescript
this.route.paramMap.subscribe((params) => {
  const id = params.get("id");
});
```

---

## Child Routes & Layouts

Nested routes allow layouts with outlets:

```typescript
{ path: 'admin', component: AdminShell, children: [ { path: 'users', component: AdminUsers } ] }
```

---

## Lazy Loading

Split large apps into lazy-loaded modules for performance.

```typescript
{ path: 'shop', loadChildren: () => import('./shop/shop.routes').then(m => m.SHOP_ROUTES) }
```

Preloading strategies (PreloadAllModules) improve UX after initial load.

---

## Guards

- `CanActivate` — block navigation.
- `CanActivateChild` — guard child routes.
- `CanDeactivate` — prevent leaving a route.
- `Resolve` — fetch data before activating a route.

```typescript
@Injectable({ providedIn: "root" })
export class AuthGuard implements CanActivate {
  constructor(private auth: AuthService, private router: Router) {}
  canActivate(): boolean | UrlTree {
    if (this.auth.isLoggedIn()) return true;
    return this.router.parseUrl("/login");
  }
}
```

---

## Navigation Extras

- `replaceUrl`, `skipLocationChange`, `state` are available for advanced scenarios.
- Use `router.getCurrentNavigation()?.extras.state` to read passed state.

---

## Resolvers

Resolvers let you load required data before the component is created to avoid loading states inside the component.

---

## Best Practices

- Keep routes declarative and small.
- Use lazy loading for feature areas.
- Use guards and resolvers to secure and prepare routes.
- Use route data (`data: { title: 'Tasks' }`) for meta info.
